It is important to understand here that computers and humans understand completely different languages. While humans are able to write programs in high-level language, computers understand machine language. There is a continuous need for conversion from high level to machine level language, for which translators are needed. Also, to write the instruction, code editors (e.g., IDLE in Python) are needed. We will briefly describe here the programming languages, language translators and program development tools.

#### (A) Classification of Programming Languages

Two major categories of computer programming languages are low-level languages and high-level languages.
Low-level languages are machine dependent languages and include machine language and assembly language. Machine language uses 1s and 0s to write instructions which are directly understood and executed by the computer. But writing a code in machine language is difficult as one has to remember all operation codes and machine addresses. Also finding errors in the code written in machine language is difficult.
To simplify the writing of code, assembly language was developed that allowed usage of English-like words and symbols instead of 1s and 0s. But one major drawback of writing a code in this language is that the code is computer specific, i.e., the code written for one type of CPU cannot be used for another type of CPU.
High level languages are machine independent and are simpler to write code into. Instructions are using English like sentences and each high level language follows a set of rules, similar to natural languages. However, these languages are not directly understood by the computer. Hence, translators are needed to translate high-level language codes into machine language. Examples of high level language include C++, Java, Python, etc.

#### (B) Language Translators

We know that computer understands instructions in machine code, i.e. in the form of 0s and 1s. It is difficult for us to write computer programs directly in machine code. The programs are written mostly in high-level languages, i.e. BASIC, C++, Python etc. or in assembly language. A program written in any high-level programming language or assembly language is called the **Source Program** or **Source Code**.

The source code cannot be executed directly by the computer. The source code must be converted into machine language to be executed. The program translated into machine code is known as **Object Program** or **Object Code**.

The special translator system software that is used to translate the program written in high-level language or Assembly language into machine code is called **language processor** or **translator program**. As we have different types of computer languages, different translators are needed to convert the source code to machine code. The language processors can be any of the following three types - Assembler, Compiler and Interpreter.

**Assembler**

The Assembler is used to translate the program written in Assembly language into machine code. The input of Assembler is a source program that contains assembly language instructions. The output generated by assembler is the object code or machine code understandable by the computer. Each assembler can understand a specific microprocessor instruction set only and hence, the machine code is not portable.

**Compiler**

The language processor that translates the complete source program as a whole in one go into machine code is called compiler. Some of the examples are C and C++ compilers. The source code is translated to object code successfully if it is free of errors. If there are any errors in the source code, the compiler specifies the errors at the end of compilation with line numbers. The errors must be removed before the compiler can successfully recompile the source code again. Once translated, the compiler is not needed.

**Interpreter**

The language processor that translates a single statement of source program into machine code and executes it immediately before moving on to the next line is called an Interpreter. If there is an error in the statement, the interpreter terminates its translating process at that statement and displays an error message. Only after removal of the error, the interpreter moves on to the next line for execution. Hence, interpreter is always needed whenever a source code is to be executed.

#### (C) Program Development Tools

An editor is a software that allows us to create a text file where we type instructions and store the file as the source code. Then an appropriate translator is used to get the object code for execution. In order to simplify the program development, there are software called Integrated Development Environment (IDE) consisting of text editor, building tools and debugger. A program can be typed, compiled and debugged from the IDE directly. Besides Python IDLE, Netbeans, Eclipse, Atom, VS Code are few other examples of IDEs. Debugger, as the name implies, is the software to detect and correct errors in the source code.
